JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: a big
win for environmentalists.
President Obama ends a
seven-year review by
rejecting the 1,100-mile
extension of the Keystone oil
pipeline.
And it's Friday. Mark Shields
and David Brooks are here to
analyze the week's news.
Plus, Pablo Picasso, known best
for his paintings, also had a
talent for sculpture, now being
shown in a new
exhibit in New York.
ANNE UMLAND, Museum of Modern
Art: Picasso, when he comes back
to making three-dimensional
objects, does it in ways that
nobody has ever done before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hiring surged in
the United States in October
after two lackluster months.
The Labor Department reported
employers added 271,000 jobs.
That's the most for one month
since December.
This helped push the
unemployment rate down to 5
percent, the lowest it's been in
seven
years. At the same time, the
proportion of Americans in the
labor force was unchanged,
at around 62 percent. Today's
strong data left the door open
to a possible interest
rate hike when Federal Reserve
Bank policy-makers meet next
month.
On Wall Street, stocks failed to
get much of a boost out of the
jobs report. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
just under 47 points to close at
17910. The Nasdaq rose
19 points, and the S&P 500 lost
a fraction of a point. For the
week, all three major
indexes gained nearly
1 percent or more.
President Obama rejected the
Keystone XL oil pipeline
proposal today, ending a
protracted
debate and handing a big victory
to environmentalists. The
controversial pipeline would
have permitted
oil from Canada's tar sands to
flow to U.S. Gulf Coast
refineries. The president said
the project would have
undermined American efforts to
secure a global climate change
deal. We will take a closer look
at the impact of his decision
right after the news summary.
The Supreme Court agreed today
to hear a fourth case
challenging President Obama's
Affordable
Care Act. This time, the court
will decide whether
religious-affiliated
institutions
like universities and hospitals
should be free from playing any
role in providing employees
contraceptive coverage. The
president's health care overhaul
currently mandates that those
institutions request
exemption from insurers.
White House spokesman Josh
Earnest said that he was
confident they would win the
legal
challenge.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: The policy that we
have in place appropriately
balances the need for millions
of Americans to have access to
birth control while also
protecting the right of
religious freedom that is
protected in our Constitution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The high court
will hear arguments in March.
There was word today the Obama
administration plans to open new
screening centers to increase
the number of Syrians taking
refuge in the U.S. Reuters,
citing unnamed officials,
reported
the outposts will be located in
Iraq and Lebanon. President
Obama had already vowed to admit
10,000 Syrian refugees into the
U.S. in 2016. It's not clear how
many more will now be taken
in.
Greek ferry workers called off
strikes today, clearing the way
for thousands of refugees
and other migrants to continue
their journeys to the Greek
mainland. The first ships
arrived
in a port near Athens this
morning. The strike, which began
Monday, stranded some 25,000
asylum
seekers in cramped conditions on
small Greek islands in the
Aegean Sea. The ferry workers
were protesting new austerity
measures under Greece's bailout.
Rescue teams in Southeastern
Brazil today desperately
searched for survivors in a
remote
village engulfed in mud after
dams from a nearby mining
complex burst. The iron ore
mine's president said the two
dams failed yesterday before
nightfall. Sludge flooded
a community downstream,
swallowing homes and cars in
thick mud. At least two people
died,
and dozens more are still
missing. Residents said no one
alerted them to the danger.
WOMAN (through translator): It
was worse than a tsunami, what
happened to house. Everyone
was shouting. There was no alarm
to warn us that the dam had
broken. Those who managed
to save themselves ran or got on
a truck that drove by and asked
people to hop on. Everyone
was panicking. About 60 people
were riding on the truck, and
the rest were left behind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's still not
clear what caused the ruptures,
but mine officials said that
seismic activity was reported in
the region shortly beforehand.
Politicians were out in force in
Myanmar today, the last day of
campaigning before the country,
formerly known as Burma, holds
its first relatively free
elections in 25 years. Hundreds
gathered
for rallies as candidates and
their supporters distributed
fliers to potential voters.
Meanwhile, election officials
set up polling stations in
advance of Sunday's vote.
Opposition
leader Aung San Suu Kyi's
National League for Democracy
Party is expected to win the
most votes over its
military-backed rival.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
President Obama says no to the
controversial Keystone
pipeline; flights canceled and
tourists stranded in Egypt, the
aftermath of the Russian plane
crash; Mark Shields and David
Brooks on this week's news, and
much more.
To many observers, President
Obama's decision on the Keystone
pipeline may have seemed like
a forgone conclusion.
But earlier during his term,
environmentalists were worried
that he would approve it.
Climate
change, however, has become a
central focus of the Obama
second term, and it was very
much on his mind today when he
announced the decision. It was a
decision seven years in
the making.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: After extensive
public outreach and consultation
with other cabinet agencies, the
State Department has decided the
Keystone XL pipeline wouldn't
serve the national interest of
the United States. I agree with
that decision.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With that,
President Obama formally
rejected TransCanada's
application
to extend the controversial
pipeline. The massive network
would have connected oil sands
in Alberta, Canada, to
refineries along the Gulf Coast,
adding to existing pipelines.
It would have carried 800,000
barrels of oil a day.
The company, along with many
Republican lawmakers in the
U.S., argued the project would
create
thousands of jobs and lower gas
prices. But Mr. Obama disagreed,
pointing out gas prices
are already lower. More
importantly, he said, the
pipeline wasn't in line with his
administration's
efforts to combat
climate change.
BARACK OBAMA: Today, we're
continuing to lead by example,
because, ultimately, if we're
going to prevent large parts of
this Earth from becoming not
only inhospitable, but
uninhabitable,
in our lifetimes, we're going to
have to keep some fossil fuels
in the ground, rather than
burn them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: TransCanada
quickly condemned the decision,
calling it -- quote --
"misplaced
symbolism."
The company's statement read:
"It is disappointing the
administration appears to have
said yes
to more oil imports from Iran
and Venezuela over oil from
Canada, the United States'
strongest
ally and trading partner."
And even some Democrats in
Congress, from states the
pipeline would have passed
through,
criticized the move.
Representative Henry
Cuellar of Texas:
REP. HENRY CUELLAR (D), Texas:
So, you're talking about jobs,
you're talking about energy
independence. And, all of a
sudden, the State Department
flip-flops and goes to the other
directions. Bottom line, it's a
job creator, and I see that on a
day-to-day basis in my
district.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
had faced considerable pressure
from the left to act, while he
kept
his own opinion under wraps.
Environmental activists staged
large protests in front of the
White House and demanded he
reject the proposal. Today, they
called the decision a big win.
But the fate of the pipeline
could change after the 2016
elections if TransCanada
reapplies.
Several Republican presidential
candidates said today they would
reverse Mr. Obama's
decision.
Clearly, there have been and
remain big divides on this
decision and the impact it will
have
for years to come.
We sample some of that reaction
with Senator Ed Markey, a
Democrat from Massachusetts who
has opposed the pipeline, and
Representative Leonard Lance.
He's a Republican from New
Jersey who sits on the House
Energy and Commerce Committee.
He was in favor of it.
Gentlemen, welcome
to the program.
Let me first get your reaction
to what the president said and
his explanation for it.
Senator Markey, you first.
SEN. EDWARD MARKEY (D),
Massachusetts: Well, it's the
right decision.
The dirtiest oil in the world is
the tar sand oil up in Canada.
This would have constructed
a pipeline like a straw through
the United States, with us
running all of the environmental
risk, all the way down to Port
Arthur, Texas, which is a
tax-free export zone, and then
the oil would just leave the
United States. No guarantee that
it would be used for American
purposes, even as we export
young men and women overseas to
protect ships bringing oil
into the Middle East.
And so it's a win on energy,
it's a win on climate, it's a
win on job creation, because
this now puts the focus back on
wind and solar and other
renewable energy resources. And
believe it or not, that the
Canadians wouldn't even have to
have contributed to the oil
liability
tax fund in the event that there
was an oil spill within the
United States.
So the president clearly made
the right decision and has much
more credibility as he heads
to Paris to give the leadership
to the rest of the world to
reduce greenhouse gases.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Representative
Lance, how do you read this
decision?
REP. LEONARD LANCE (R), New
Jersey: I think this is
perception over reality.
I think the pipeline would be in
the national interest of the
United States. It would have
created 42,000 jobs for building
the pipeline, some permanent
jobs, and I think this was
based upon politics and not the
science and not on the merits.
And I'm sorry that the president
acted as he did today. A new
president elected in 2016
could change the decision
beginning in 2017, if the
company reapplies. Canada is our
strongest
and closest ally. And while
we're permitting the purchase of
Iranian oil across the globe,
we're not doing the same for
our friend and ally Canada.
And this was supported
overwhelmingly by the American
people and overwhelmingly in
Congress
in a bipartisan way both in the
House of Representatives and the
United States Senate. I think
the
vote in the House was 270 to
156, and in the United States
Senate something like 62 to
36. I think it's unfortunate
that the president made his
decision today, seven years in
the
making, that should have been
made within a year, and I'm
sorry that the decision was
made today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you both about some of the
points you're making.
Senator Markey, what about this
point that -- is this really a
decision that's going
to have serious impact, when the
next president could come along
in just over a year and reverse
it and say yes to the pipeline?
SEN. EDWARD MARKEY: I think
that, obviously, there is a
precedent which is being set.
There is a decision made by a
president after he has looked at
the extensive record of
environmental
damage, as well as national
security, and whether or not it
does create energy independence,
which it wouldn't, because I
actually made the amendment on
the Senate floor in January
saying that the oil has to
stay in the United States.
And just about every Republican
voted no and defeated my effort
to keep the oil in the
United States. So, any time you
hear them now talk about energy
independence, then ask
them why they voted against
keeping it in our country, while
the American Petroleum
Institute is simultaneously
trying to lift the ban on the
exportation of oil that is
drilled for in the
United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
let me ask...
(CROSSTALK)
SEN. EDWARD MARKEY: And we still
import -- we still import five
million barrels of oil a
day in our country, just pretty
much the largest in the world,
and yet this is a whole effort
to export oil out of our
country. It makes no sense
whatsoever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask
Congressman Lance about that
point.
What about that?
REP. LEONARD LANCE: Some of the
oil would stay here. It would be
refined here and stay
here. Some of it would
undoubtedly go abroad.
But The Washington Post gave
four Pinocchios to the
president's remarks earlier in
the
year that it would just go
through this country and that
some of it wouldn't stay here.
Some
of it clearly would stay here.
And that was evidenced by the
decision of The Washington
Post to give the president four
Pinocchios on that matter.
Regardless of that, I think that
this is in the best interest of
the United States. And,
certainly, both the old Canadian
prime minister and the new
Canadian prime minister, Mr.
Trudeau,
support this. And I hope that a
new president in 2017 will take
a look at this again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Congressman
Lance, let me just pick up on
that. There is also an
economic argument that's been
made that these oil companies
may decide, given the low price
of oil right now, that it may
not be worth their while to ship
this expensive tar sands
oil through the pipeline.
So, couldn't that make this
whole thing moot, this project?
REP. LEONARD LANCE: I would
imagine oil prices will rise
over time. I cannot imagine they
will stay where they are now.
This obviously is an economic
decision.
But a pipeline, Judy, is safer
than transporting oil by rail,
and that really is the
alternative,
and the State Department
recognizes that this is safer
than the alternative through
rail
or truck, and that is another
reason why I think the pipeline
should be built.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator
Markey, let me come back to
something else. We're seeing
some analysis today that -- and
the president himself said this.
He said this is a largely
-- or suggested this is largely
a symbolic move. He said this is
not going to be -- quote
-- "the express lane to climate
disaster that some people
argue."
And the argument is made that
one oil infrastructure projects
is really not going to affect
climate
change that much.
SEN. EDWARD MARKEY: Well, on the
other hand, you cannot preach
temperance from a bar stool.
So, if the United States is
going to be in Paris, that's
what the president will be doing
in representing our country, you
can't be telling the rest of the
world to be reducing
your greenhouse gases while
simultaneously saying that we're
going to allow for a pipeline
to be built with big
environmental issues, carrying
the dirtiest oil in the world,
and
to do so credibly as we tell
other countries that they should
reduce their consumption
of fossil fuels, they should
reduce their greenhouse gases.
So I think that it's not
insignificant. In fact, I think
it's very important, in
combination
with the president's clean power
rules to reduce greenhouse gases
from the utilities,
which the Republicans oppose, to
continue to keep the fuel
economy standards heading
towards 54.5 miles per gallon by
the year 2025, which the
Republicans pledge to take
off the books, and to keep the
tax breaks for wind and solar on
the books, which the
Republicans are pledging
to take off the books.
It's part of a totality of a
story that the United States can
now bring with great credibility
to Paris that makes it possible
for us to say that, China and
India and other countries,
you must now do your part.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just 10 seconds
left, Congressman Lance. Do you
want to respond?
REP. LEONARD LANCE: Yes, I don't
think either China or India will
be impressed by this.
I think this will make no
difference at all in Paris, and
I hope that a new president
revisits this in 2017.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman
Leonard Lance, Senator Ed
Markey, we thank you both.
SEN. EDWARD MARKEY: Thank
you. Appreciate it.
REP. LEONARD LANCE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Russia suspended
all flights to Egypt today, and
the U.S. stepped up security
efforts, as the search continues
for answers to what brought down
that Russian plane. The
passenger jet crashed over the
Sinai Peninsula last Saturday,
killing all 224 people on board.
Margaret Warner has the story.
MARGARET WARNER: It was chaos at
the Sharm el-Sheikh Airport
today. Britain's ambassador
to Egypt tried to reassure
anxious travelers, to little
avail.
WOMAN: So, what's the problem?
You're stuttering now. We want
to go home.
MARGARET WARNER: About 20,000
British tourists have been
stuck, as flight schedules
remain
in flux. Today was the first
time flights were available back
to Britain. Now about
30,000 Russian tourists are
joining the chaos, after Russian
President Vladimir Putin, in
a turnaround, stopped
all flights to Egypt.
Russia's security chief made the
recommendation this morning.
ALEXANDER BORTNIKOV, Director,
Federal Security Service
(through translator): I think it
will
be reasonable to suspend all
Russian flights until we
determine the real causes of
what
happened. We must reach
completely objective and
validated conclusions. That's
important
for both the investigation
and informing people.
MARGARET WARNER: Some wreckage
from the plane crash site has
been taken to Moscow for
explosives
testing. Yesterday, British
Prime Minister David Cameron
said it was more likely than
not that a bomb brought the
plane down. And the Islamic
State group claimed
responsibility.
There were also reports that
chatter intercepted from
suspected militants pointed to
that conclusion
as well.
Still, in Washington, White
House spokesman Josh Earnest
wasn't ready to make any
declarations.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: The United States
still has not made our own
determination about the cause of
the incident. And while we can't
rule anything in or out,
we have to consider the
possibility of potential
terrorist involvement here.
MARGARET WARNER: Today, however,
the Homeland Security Department
announced new precautions
for U.S.-bound flights from the
region, including stepped-up
baggage and cargo screening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Margaret
joins me now for more.
Margaret, thank you
for that report.
So, what explains the shift in
Russia's thinking? First, Putin
is saying, no, we don't want
to believe that this was an act
of terror, but now they're
suspending flights.
MARGARET WARNER: Well, Judy,
Putin is one of the two leaders
involved here who has the
most to lose economically and
-- but mostly politically.
One Russian said to me today,
this isn't just a human
question, a security question,
but
a deeply political one.
So, he's in a dilemma, or he has
felt in a dilemma, because here
he is with this adventure
into Syria, and in fact he was
asked on Russian TV just within
the last two weeks, does this
put us at risk? He
said absolutely not.
So, if it does turn out it's a
greater risk, that's a problem.
Then, people close to the
Kremlin told me also that, if
that's the conclusion, he wants
to be ready with a plan, sort of
like George W. Bush after 9/11.
So, the Ministry of Defense is
working on a lot of contingency
plans.
And I'm told that there's a huge
movement of Russian assault
ships moving into the Eastern
Mediterranean. That said, the
Russians have investigators on
the ground. The people they
sent are from the FSB, which is
essentially the KGB successor.
They must have seen something
that overnight made them to
recommend to Putin that, you
have got to protect Russian
citizens.
And, as somebody said to me, if
he didn't and he didn't say
anything and there were
another attack, there would
really be hell to pay.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Margaret, you
have also got this discrepancy
with the Egyptians not
wanting to believe that there
was a bomb, that there was
terror involved, but you have
got European countries saying
something different, saying they
have reason to think there may
well have been.
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
And, in fact, there were reports
from France today -- they're
unsourced -- that the French
investigators -- the only
investigators on the ground,
Judy, are the Russians, the
Egyptians
and the French. Like,
the U.S. is not there.
So -- but the French have come
to that conclusion, but that's
sourced reports. So, for
President
El-Sisi, there is so much at
stake. First of all, what a blow
to their last remaining
tourism industry. I mean, Sharm
el-Sheikh was really it at this
point.
But, secondly, he won election
after taking power in what many
consider a coup saying,
I am the general. I can
protect us from terrorism.
And, in fact, terrorism has
increased. He keeps saying and
asserting, we have control
over Sinai. Well, they don't.
Jihadist groups are much more
active there than they were.
And one of them declared
leadership to the Islamic State.
So they're really in a bind.
They insist -- and I talked to
an Egyptian, someone close to
the government today, who said
it really isn't definitive
information, but, you know,
also,
he will pay a huge political
price. Yet, I'm told there is a
recognition on the part of
that government that, if they
wait too long, and the whole
rest of the world has come to
a conclusion, they will look
like they're hiding something.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, meantime,
you also have daylight between
what the Brits are saying
-- the British are saying and
what the U.S. -- the British are
saying, well, we think
there is likely reason to
believe it was a bomb.
MARGARET WARNER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. is
saying, no, we're not ready to
make that declaration.
MARGARET WARNER: To me, Judy,
that was in a way the most
fascinating sort of conundrum,
because I'm told the U.S. and
the British are looking at the
exact same set of intelligence.
It clearly points to it a bomb,
but the British -- Prime
Minister Cameron, I'm told, felt
under -- you know, they had to
move quickly to save or protect
British citizens. They
have got 20,000 there, as we
have reported frequently. The
U.S. has essentially none.
They have direct flights to
Sharm el-Sheikh. The U.S. has
none -- and that Cameron felt,
if he's going to suspend all
flights both directions, he had
to have -- do it with some
transparency, and that that was
what led them to say what they
said.
That said, a U.S. official told
me just minutes ago that it did
come as a surprise to Washington
yesterday when he did this, but
that there wasn't tension over
this. And the U.S. just
feels that it's got no
investigators on the ground. It
and the Brits are looking more
at overhead intelligence,
signals intelligence, as we
reported, and that they don't --
the
U.S. feels it doesn't need to
jump the gun. It doesn't need to
assert that it's got these
investigators on the ground,
and, frankly, undercut Egypt
completely, that they're just
going to wait and let
it ripen a little more.
And, really, 15 minutes ago, I
was told, somebody said to me,
"From what I have seen, we still
can't be entirely sure."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret Warner,
following the story of the plane
crash very closely,
we thank you.
MARGARET WARNER: A
pleasure, Judy, as always.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Pablo Picasso in 3-D; and the
man behind an on-stage comedy
about racism.
But, first, a White House
decision finally on the Keystone
pipeline, a rough week for
some Republican candidates, and
wins for conservatives on
Election Day.
First, we turn to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks. That's
syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and New York Times
columnist David Brooks.
Gentlemen, welcome.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's
great to have you here.
So, that Keystone pipeline
decision, David, the president
finally -- seven years later,
we now know he's against it.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. Well, first
of all, it could be mythical.
With oil prices so low,
they might never build it
anyway. So, it really doesn't
matter at some level.
But pretending it matters, I do
think it's an
anti-environmental, anti-science
move.
His State Department and many
other experts decided, if the
oil is going to come out of
the sands, it's a lot cleaner to
have it go through the pipeline
than to put on trains
or trucks and send it over to
China through ships that way.
And, so, if the oil comes out of
the sands, which it's going to
do if it makes economic
sense, we might as well do it in
the cleanest way possible. So,
to me, this is just a political
decision to placate some people
who he's offended with some of
his other decisions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Political
decision, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I don't think
anyone could accuse the
president of being impulsive. It
was seven
years, five exhaustive studies.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And I think it
became a symbol for both sides,
bigger than it was really.
I don't think it was going to be
an environmental disaster. And I
don't think, with gasoline
$2 a gallon cheaper than it was
the day that Barack Obama was
nominated, the urgency had
abated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's
quickly turn, because there's so
much news to ask you both about.
Jobs reports, David, some really
good numbers today. More jobs
than what had been forecast.
Unemployment rate is down, I
guess, as low as it's been in
seven years, and not only
-- but there is still this worry
about the so-called
participation rate. How do you
read
this?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, so far,
obviously, it's great.
And if this maintains, it's
great for Hillary Clinton or the
Democratic nominee. The
political
effects are kind of simple and
obvious. The labor force
participation rate is the
worrying
one, because it didn't change.
And so all these people are out
of the job market. Are
they people who could get back
in if there were jobs out there,
or are they people who
have been so far out, that
they really can't get back in?
And there was this troubling
study that came out earlier in
the week that middle-aged white
life expectancy is dropping,
which is astounding. And it's
dropping because of liver
diseases,
suicide. It's dropping because
of social dysfunction. And those
are presumably a lot of people
who
are out of the labor force.
And so, if it keeps going, we
will be able to see if some of
these people can get back
in and have productive lives,
have busy lives, have fulfilling
lives. But if they're
permanently
out no matter what the
unemployment rate is, then we
have got a gigantic problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was
a disturbing report.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, your
discussion this week with Dante
and the professor from Princeton
really hit on the fact that so
many of these people, it's not
just liver disease and smoking
and drinking. It's jobs and
lives that have been changed.
It's the cost of the
deindustrialization of America.
These people, the high school
graduates
who had great lives, good jobs
and could raise a family and
live comfortably, and all of
a sudden that's gone. And behind
it is a low-paying job, many
times not even that.
The numbers today, just think of
this, Judy. When Barack -- when
Paul Ryan and Mitt Romney
were nominated, the unemployment
rate in the country was 8.2
percent. That's just, what,
three years ago. OK? And at that
time, they pledged to get
unemployment in their first
term under 6 percent.
Today, it's 5 percent. There
were more private sector jobs
created in the past month than
there were in eight years of
George W. Bush. So, it's good
news. We're still waiting for
the wages to kick up,
but it is good news.
I share with David the concern
about the participation in the
labor force, but this is good
news,
and it's good news
for the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I ask because
people are -- just seem to have
that never-ending debate, is
the glass half-full or is the
glass half-empty? And these
numbers seem to raise that
question
again.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
And there were fears that if you
look at the normal rhythm of a
recovery, we're so deep
into this recovery time-wise
that you could think, well,
maybe it's time for another
recession.
There was some fear of that. But
we don't seem close to being in
another recession.
That is excellent news. The Fed
is now likely to raise rates.
And so it's good news. And it's
just plain old good news. We
might as well lie back and
enjoy it.
MARK SHIELDS: Accept it.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
several things to ask you about
with regard to the campaigns.
Some interesting reporting this
week, Mark, about the campaigns
both of Marco Rubio and
what he's said or not said about
his own personal financial past,
and then today and in the
last few days a lot of reporting
about -- around Ben Carson and
what he said in a book, which
I happen to have right here,
that came out 25 years ago,
where he made different claims
about whether he was accepted at
West Point, offered a
scholarship, whether he applied
and got a scholarship, and then
another one about whether he
knifed -- tried to knife
a friend or a family member.
Does all this, at this point in
the campaign, add up to
something? What are we to make
of
all this?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, the choice
of president, Judy, is the most
personal vote that any American
casts.
We got an information overload
about these people. And it
really is in the final analysis
a choice on character and how
comfortable we are with the
person. So, the higher the
office, the more important the
candidate, and you fly at a
higher visibility when you're
running for president.
You get more exposure.
Your credentials are
scrutinized. Your record is
scrutinized. And the failures of
our presidents
over the past half-century have
not been failures of intellect
or education. They have been
failures of personality
or character.
Now, Ben Carson presents a
rather remarkable exception.
Most candidates get in trouble
by embellishing their record,
that is, by saying -- they were
a junior varsity, that
they were actually all state in
football, or that I was at the
top of my class, when
it took me five years to
get through high school.
Ben Carson wants to present
himself as a thug, a hoodlum, a
really bad -- just...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: When he was 14.
MARK SHIELDS: When he was 14.
And -- but nobody else will
support him.
They remember him -- and he
talks about putting a knife and
running into the belt. He would
have inflicted great bodily
harm. I just find that rather
bizarre.
DAVID BROOKS: Has there ever
been a Christian memoir where
the Christian says, well, when
I was a sinner, I was a really
very serious sinner. And so they
are all bragging about
how bad they were and
then they were redeemed.
So, it's not atypical. I'm
wondering, will it hurt him? I
play this little mental game
with myself. Imagine a candidate
I really admired. I heard he
exaggerated his West Point
possible admissions. Would I
say, oh, I really admire that
guy, but he told a fib about his
early youth, I think I won't
support him anymore? I don't
think I would do that.
If there were six fibs, maybe.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: But if it's this
one or this two, it's hard for
me to imagine an actual
voter who really likes Ben
Carson walking away because of
this.
Memoirists, every memoir has
some exaggerations and some
melodrama, and we're all
sinners,
so I don't think this rises to
the level where it's going to
hurt him, at least so far.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, both Ben
Carson and Marco Rubio are
saying these are questions the
press
just is wasting their time
asking, that they're way off the
point. Are these legitimate
questions?
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Well, yes, they're
legitimate questions, because
the president is an enormously
important office that touches
the lives of everybody in this
country.
And what kind of a person, the
candor, the character, the
constancy, the reliability
-- Ben Carson's problem is, he
wrote this about himself. This
isn't what somebody else
alleged about him. So, I think
-- and we don't have a lot about
Ben Carson we know. He hasn't
been in office for 12, 14, 15
years, say, oh, well, this was
just a little -- I think
Marco Rubio is different.
Marco Rubio, this has been
kicking around on Marco Rubio,
the charge about using the
charge card of the Florida state
party when he was speaker of the
House in Tallahassee,
for five or six year years. He
should be ready to take care of
it. He should be ready to
rebut it and he should do it
forthrightly. It's kind of, I'm
going to come up with the
information. I'm
going to find it.
It's a little bit like the way
Jeb Bush handled the question of
his brother going into Iraq
without there being any weapons
of mass destruction. Would you
do it? It took him a week to do
it. He changed his answers
four or five times.
I just think this is one where
Marco Rubio should be ready to
step up because he knew
it was coming.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. It's
obviously unconsciously very
difficult for him.
I wonder if he could get away
with just saying, I made a
mistake, and I want to
apologize.
It was a mistake.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: It would be
interesting to see if that would
work.
The Rubio allegations come in
two categories. The one is about
the student loans and the
buying the boat. And those, I
think, are fine, because they
just show he's a normal guy.
He had some economic struggles.
He had some young kids, so he
cashed in their retirement
account.
The credit card is the tougher
one. And some -- partly, he's
blamed a travel agent and
stuff like that. But he should
just come out, I would say, and
say, listen, we have made
mistakes in life.
This was one of mine.
It would be a gutsy thing to do.
But it would be candid. And we
saw this Chris Christie
video this week about addiction.
We found it so moving. And I
would encourage all the
candidates, be more personal.
just be more personal. Don't be
a machine. Don't let the
consultants control everything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly, you
mentioned Jeb Bush this week.
Yesterday, I was able to -- we
were able to air the interview I
did with Jon Meacham,
the author who's written a book,
really comprehensive biography
of President Bush 41, George
H.W.
Bush.
The news coming out of that,
Mark, was the criticism that the
first President Bush makes
of his son's secretary of -- his
vice president and his secretary
of defense, Donald Rumsfeld
and Dick Cheney.
And this week, you had the
younger Bush commenting, saying,
"I stand by what I did."
And it put -- it was interesting
how it put Jeb Bush a little bit
on the spot again about
the Iraq War. Is this the kind
of thing that is a problem for
Jeb Bush? Does this go anywhere?
What do you make of this?
MARK SHIELDS: It's a
problem for Jeb Bush.
Jeb Bush is trying to get back
on stride. He's trying to get
over a bad debate, trying
to get the bad campaign back on,
wants to show himself connecting
with voters. And so
what is the question? He sits
down for the interviews and they
ask, what do you think
about your father criticizing
your brother's secretary of
defense, saying that -- very
unflattering things about
Dick Cheney and Don Rumsfeld?
It has always mystified
everybody who knew the first
President Bush why W. ever chose
Don Rumsfeld, who had actually
knifed Bush 41, his father...
JUDY WOODRUFF: His father, yes.
MARK SHIELDS: ... and really was
-- and then, of course,
administered the coup in his
rebuttal
about the book by saying, well,
he's obviously getting up in
years and he's too old,
something
that Jon Meacham put to -- I
thought to rest in his interview
with you, that he was very
much alert and
involved and engaged.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's
exactly what he said.
Is this the kind of thing
the matters today, David?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it will hurt
-- it will be a distraction for
Bush. But Bush is at
4 percent. He has got
bigger -- bigger problems.
But the things the elder Bush
said, the younger Bush, W. Bush,
believed by 2005. This was
a conventional view. I think
these interviews were done in
'08 and '10.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: And so George W.
Bush had come to these views
about Cheney and Rumsfeld at
the same time.
One of the -- there are many
things that interest me about
what Meacham has come up with.
One
is that the elder Bush didn't
talk that much about the war to
the younger -- to the president,
very reticent, very withdrawn,
second, that their Iraq policies
were not that different,
where we had always imagined the
big differences between the two.
So, there is a lot of
interesting stuff in there. I'm
struck by Bush family reticence.
And we see it hurting
Jeb these days.
MARK SHIELDS: I always thought
that the piece signed in The
Wall Street Journal by Jim Baker
and...
DAVID BROOKS: Scowcroft.
MARK SHIELDS: ... and
Brent Scowcroft...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brent Scowcroft.
MARK SHIELDS: ... his national
security adviser and his closest
political adviser, warning
against the invasion by the
United States of Iraq, was the
memo to Bush 41 to Bush 43,
which he chose to ignore.
And when Bob Woodward asked him
if he talked to his father, he
said, "I speak to my divine
father."
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right, the
higher father. He said higher
father.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: The higher
father. Higher father.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: I mean, thus
putting him in his place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
We didn't get around to those
elections this week. We will
talk about it next Friday.
MARK SHIELDS: Promise?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, I
promise, I promise.
Mark Shields, David
Brooks, thank you both.
DAVID BROOKS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, remember,
you can sign up for -- I have
got to read this from a distance
-- you can sign up for the
"NewsHour"'s Politics e-mail.
Click the subscribe link at the
top
of our home page to receive
updates from our politics team,
including Mark and David's
weekly analysis.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Next: Pablo Picasso was one of
the world's most famous
painters. But a new exhibit at
the Museum of Modern Art in New
York examines his contributions
to another medium, sculpture.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: A court jester in
bronze, an early experiment in
three dimensions by Pablo
Picasso. As Picasso Sculpture,
the huge and much-lauded
exhibition at New York's Museum
of Modern Art shows,
experiment is the right word.
And it never stopped. Ann Temkin
is one of the show's curators.
ANN TEMKIN, Museum of Modern
Art: It certainly had to do with
a spark of inspiration, either
technically or some kind of
puzzle that came to his mind.
JEFFREY BROWN: Picasso was the
preeminent artist of the 20th
century, but this side
of him remains far less known
than his painting. He formally
trained as a painter, and kept
at that throughout his life.
Upstairs in the museum, one can
see many famous examples,
including the groundbreaking
cubist
masterwork from 1907 Les
Demoiselles d'Avignon.
The Sculpture exhibition, over
140 works gathered from
institutions around the world,
shows
Picasso breaking ground in this
medium as well, but more
playfully, in spurts, as he
became curious about
space and material.
Co-curator Anne Umland:
ANNE UMLAND, Museum of Modern
Art: Now, stepping over this
threshold, we have just
time-traveled
three years. And in those three
years, Picasso, when he comes
back to making three-dimensional
objects, does it in ways that
nobody has ever done before.
JEFFREY BROWN: A guitar made of
paper, string, cardboard. A
violin made of painted sheet
metal and wire. Picasso changed
the history of art through his
choice of everyday subjects,
his use of materials, his mixing
of genres, as with the six small
absinthe glasses brought
together in this exhibition for
the first time since they were
in Picasso's studio,
colorfully painted bronze, a
real spoon all twisted together
into a new kind of sculpture.
ANNE UMLAND: Up until now,
pretty much, sculpture has to do
with recognizable bodies of
people,
and they are modeled or cast.
They're very solid. And instead
of that, Picasso decides
he is going to make a sculpture
of something small and domestic
and that you hold in your
hand. He sets out to overturn
just about every sort of rule or
given or way of thinking about
material that you
can come up with.
JEFFREY BROWN: After every phase
of experimentation, represented
here by individual rooms,
Picasso
would leave aside sculpture for
several years, before picking it
up again, always with something
new, these figures from the late
1920s, for example, and then a
group of more monumental
heads in the early 1930s.
Unlike his paintings, Picasso
rarely exhibited his sculptures.
Instead, he lived with them.
ANNE UMLAND: He's not coming out
of a sculpture tradition in
Western art. He's looking at
African or oceanic objects that
have a ritual function and that
have a soul or an anima.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you think
he thought of them that way?
ANNE UMLAND: I think he thought
of his sculptures as personages.
JEFFREY BROWN: Personages,
which means what?
ANNE UMLAND: Which would mean,
to me, things that have a life.
JEFFREY BROWN: This giant
head of a woman is from 1932.
ANNE UMLAND: I think it's
amazing how she's both
monumental and goofy at the same
time.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. You say
goofy, which I'm not -- I'm sure
is a technical term in -- art
curators.
ANNE UMLAND: Yes, very
highly technical.
JEFFREY BROWN: But it is sort of
introducing the goofy to a
tradition that is more about...
ANNE UMLAND: Solemnity
and admiration.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ANNE UMLAND: No, I think the way
that he manages to make things
that, yes, I will stick with
my word choice of goofy or
cartoony or the way the features
are exaggerated, that maybe
that's back to part of what he's
doing to animate something that
otherwise is very solid
and inanimate.
JEFFREY BROWN: Picasso remained
in German-occupied Paris through
the war years, using materials
at hand, including for this
bull's head, an old bicycle seat
and handlebars cast in bronze.
ANN TEMKIN: And what's amazing
is, with the casting, you still
read the metal of the handlebars
and the leather of the seat
extremely clearly. And I think
what Picasso loved about the
joke
was the fact that the bronze
casting of these ordinary
everyday objects sort of turns
them
into a work of art, but not
completely. You're still aware
of that original bicycle
identity.
RACHEL HARRISON, Artist:
Anything goes. And you can feel
that in his work.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rachel Harrison
is a prominent contemporary
artist whose work, like
Picasso's,
crosses genres. She sees a sense
of play, but also the horror of
war.
RACHEL HARRISON: I look at those
bodies, and I see limbs that
have come apart and come
back together, and I see things
that are more gruesome than
beautiful.
If the materials appear playful,
it's because it wasn't his first
medium and he had a comfort
in oil and oil paint. And so
when he comes to these other
materials, like metal or
plaster,
there's just a kind of freedom
that he has to experiment, and
there's less at stake,
because he wasn't exhibiting
them in the same way.
JEFFREY BROWN: The playfulness
continued into his later years.
And the exhibition ends with
a group of models Picasso worked
on in the 1960s, when he was in
his 80s. In some cases,
they became monumental public
sculptures, including his last
and largest in Chicago's
Richard J. Daley Center.
ANN TEMKIN: He had dreamed of
making monumentally scaled work.
And with these enlargements,
there's just an entirely
different physical and
psychological relationship to
them.
JEFFREY BROWN: One question this
exhibition has raised for some
art critics, was Picasso
a better sculptor than painter?
ANNE UMLAND: I don't think we
have to choose. I think we come
down on the side of Picasso
the artist.
JEFFREY BROWN: Not, in the
end, a bad side to choose.
From the Museum of Modern Art in
New York, I'm Jeffrey Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, tonight,
as part of the Friday night arts
lineup, PBS and OnStage
in America present a stage
comedy about racism that throws
political correctness out the
window.
Hari Sreenivasan recently sat
down with the play's author,
Greg Kalleres.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tonight on
PBS, a performance that takes a
look at racism through the lens
of marketing and commercialism.
"Honky" is a satirical comedy
about five people attempting to
navigate the dicey waters of
race, rhetoric and basketball
shoes. A performance of the play
was taped at the San Diego
Repertory
Theatre.
And the author, Greg
Kalleres, joins me know.
So, thank you for joining me.
First of all, why this play?
GREG KALLERES, Playwright,
"Honky": Well, I worked in
advertising. I kind of stumbled
into advertising.
I think I was shocked mainly by
how white the industry was in
general, and because so
much of the stuff that we're
marketing is to non-white
demographics, it was interesting
to see how many people were
forced to speak comfortably
about something that they were
clearly not comfortable.
ACTOR: Would you wear these?
ACTOR: Sure.
ACTOR: I mean, what do you mean?
ACTOR: See, I think it
looks like a circus shoe.
ACTOR: You don't like it.
ACTOR: I can't think of a pair
of pants that would go with
them.
GREG KALLERES: For me, like, the
language is the most important
thing, so hearing people
tiptoe around words and the
things they can say and can't
say and should and shouldn't
say when that guy is in
the room is fascinating.
ACTOR: For the last 15 years,
Sky has been selling to your
people and only your people.
(LAUGHTER)
ACTOR: Is it cool if I talk like
this? I'm not making you
uncomfortable. My people, your
people. I grew up in Chicago.
The point is, these are facts.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There is a
black man struggling with the
tension of selling basketball
shoes
to young urban demographics.
There's a white guy who has
problems with the words that he
used and what sort of
consequences they could have
had.
There's so many people dealing
with guilt of their racial
identity in America today
on so many different levels.
GREG KALLERES: These two
characters specifically, Thomas
is the black shoe designer. And
he
grew up in a really rich white
neighborhood. And I think he has
a lot of conflict around
that, because there is so much
around the idea of being black
enough.
He designs shoes for a shoe
company that is primarily
targeting young black males, and
he's very proud of that. But he
also has this other side of him
that he feels is white.
ACTOR: I knew it would take a
toll. Growing up around all
those rich white people takes
a toll. It takes a toll.
ACTRESS: OK.
ACTOR: I knew, eventually, I
would be getting bent over by
Clay Aiken, Coldplay, "Downton
Abbey."
(LAUGHTER)
ACTOR: I would wake up in a cold
sweat needing to buy some $600
Nottingham wall sconce from
Pottery Barn.
ACTRESS: You said that sconce
gave your place a nice classic
feel.
ACTOR: You're damn right it's a
nice classic feel. And it's an
elegant way to disguise
the lack of furniture in that
part of the room, but you're
missing the point.
(LAUGHTER)
ACTRESS: And that is?
ACTOR: This is not what
black people talk about.
GREG KALLERES: And there's
peter, who is the copywriter.
And this is I guess what I
relate
to the most, because I was this
copywriter writing for brands
that were targeting urban
demographics.
And when you're targeting a
certain demographic and you're
not that demographic, I thought
that was an interesting
in for the play.
ACTRESS: Why don't you tell me
why you came to see me today?
ACTOR: A kid was murdered for a
pair of shoes, and I think it's
because of the commercial
I wrote.
ACTRESS: Sky shoes, you
wrote that ad? S'up now?
ACTOR: Not too
much. How are you?
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's also
this idea that there is no more
derogatory a term for white
people than racist. It just
triggers all kinds of responses.
GREG KALLERES: I couldn't think
of a word that insults white
people the way that the
N-word or other slurs insult
people of color. And there
really isn't one, which is why
the
play is called "Honky," because
it's such a benign, comical
term.
HARI SREENIVASAN: If that's
the worst you can do.
GREG KALLERES: If that's the
worst you can do, is honky. I
mean, I haven't heard that
used with sincerity since, like,
a Clint Eastwood-Dirty Harry
movie, I think.
The idea of being a racist, I
think, for white people is about
the closest you get to making
them scared, or
offended, or upset.
ACTOR: I run an
urban shoe company.
ACTOR: Urban?
ACTOR: It's a euphemism for
African-American. The point is,
I spend a lot of times with
African-Americans. I know the
African-American culture and
sell to the African-American a
product.
ACTOR: You don't have to say
African-American every time, Mr.
Tallison. You can simply use...
ACTOR: Urban.
ACTOR: I was going
to say a pronoun.
ACTOR: Oh.
ACTOR: I sell basketball
shoes to them.
ACTOR: Well, now the
pronoun is offensive.
(LAUGHTER)
ACTOR: My overall point is,
I don't think I'm a racist.
ACTOR: Of course you don't.
That's precisely why you are
one. Do you understand?
ACTOR: No.
GREG KALLERES: They will often
lose sleep over the fact that,
I'm not racist. I didn't
say anything racist. Did I say
something racist? No, no, no.
I'm not racist. I said -- what
I said was -- and there's a lot
of back-stepping, and digging
more graves for themselves as
they continue to constantly, you
know, obviously attempt,
well-meaningly, to say the right
thing, and often failing.
ACTOR: I'm getting married soon.
ACTRESS: Congratulations.
ACTOR: Thank you.
She's very white.
(LAUGHTER)
ACTOR: I don't know why I just
said that. I don't mean white as
in the distinction between
the colors white and black. I
just mean she's very, you know,
white.
(LAUGHTER)
ACTOR: This is sounding bad. The
truth is, I'm totally
colorblind.
(LAUGHTER)
ACTOR: And I don't mean that
figuratively either. I mean I
don't see color. You should
see my socks,
totally integrated.
(LAUGHTER)
GREG KALLERES: I think the humor
in the play comes from the
attempt to never be called
one, and all the efforts we make
for people never to say, you're
a racist, or think you're
a racist.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of other
threads that you pull on in this
is that -- the commercialization
of racial identity in America.
You use a product, a basketball
shoe specifically. There is this
tension on what keeps something
real, what makes something sold
out, when does that crossover
happen.
GREG KALLERES: Cultural
appropriation has been going on
forever.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's part of
what America is about. Right?
GREG KALLERES: Absolutely.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We take
everything from everyone and
make something new out of it.
GREG KALLERES: Yes, because it's
authentic. And then we sort of
de-authenticate it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Homogenize it.
GREG KALLERES: Exactly,
and it becomes a cliche.
ACTOR: They're mine?
ACTOR: Yours? Didn't you
hear what I just said?
ACTOR: Give them to me.
ACTOR: No, no, no, no. This is
good. Let's think about this.
What is yours? What does
the black man, Thomas Hodge,
have when all the dust is
settled? Your history? Culture?
No. Bought and sold years
ago, just like ours.
GREG KALLERES: It's something to
think about when you watch
commercials or to watch
anything.
How -- where do they come from?
Where do these ideas come from?
HARI SREENIVASAN: But you made
the awkward very digestible.
GREG KALLERES: Hopefully. At
least it's somewhat funny.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Greg Kalleres, thanks so much
for joining us.
GREG KALLERES: Hey, thank you
so much. This was great.
HARI SREENIVASAN: "Honky" is a
project of OnStage in America,
and airs tonight on most
PBS stations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on the
"NewsHour" online: A Syrian
filmmaker captured beautiful
scenes
of his hometown just weeks
before war erupted. Today, that
footage has become a love letter
to his country, and is part of a
short film called "In Damascus."
You can watch that on
our home page.
And meet a man who's celebrating
his 161st birthday today, that
is, his alter ego, John
Philip Sousa's birthday. For the
past eight years, Ron Anzalone
has impersonated Sousa
at an annual celebration at
Washington, D.C.'s, historic
Congressional Cemetery. He
offered
us a quick history lesson on the
famous composer's legacy and
love of marching music.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs from our PBS
colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
later tonight. Here's a preview:
GWEN IFILL: We have got a lot to
tackle tonight, from the White
House, where the final shoe
dropped on a controversial oil
pipeline, to the campaign trail,
where Ben Carson and Jeb
Bush are both on the defensive,
oh, and good news on jobs, all
tonight on "Washington Week"
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On "PBS NewsHour
Weekend" Saturday: how police in
Memphis are trying to keep those
with mental illness out of jail.
Here's an excerpt from the
report.
MAN: Mother is involved with her
son, and he's diagnosed with
ADHD and mood disorder.
MAN: What's going on?
NARRATOR: Ross is part of the
Memphis Police Department's
Crisis Intervention Team, or
CIT.
MAN: See, everybody at their
school knows that you're smart,
that you have got something
going for yourself
NARRATOR: Ross is trained to
de-escalate situations using
mostly verbal techniques.
MAN: As a matter of fact, I'm
going to give you my number.
When you're having a problem,
call me, OK? If you're feeling
sad or you're feeling depressed,
call me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with a look at the
massive epidemic of diabetes
in Mexico, and one approach to
improving access to much needed
medical care.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.